# Introduction 

\label{sec:introduction}

The move towards Open Science has increased the need and demand for the publication of artefacts of the research process [@sefton_blog_post_2021]. This is particularly apparent in domains that rely on computational experiments; for example, the publication of software, datasets and records of the dependencies that such experiments rely on [@doi:10.1126/science.aah6168]. 

It is often argued that the publication of these assets, and specifically software [@doi:10.3233/DS-190026], workflows [@doi:10.1162/dint_a_00033] and data, should follow the FAIR principles [@doi:10.1038/sdata.2016.18]; namely, that they are Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable. These principles are agnostic to the _implementation_ strategy needed to comply with them. Hence, there has been an increasing amount of work in the development of platforms and specifications that aim to fulfil these goals [@isbn:9781315351148]. 

Important examples include data publication with rich metadata (e.g. Zenodo [@doi:10.3897/biss.3.37080]), domain-specific data deposition (e.g. PDB [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkl971]) and following practices for reproducible research software [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003285] (e.g. use of containers). While these platforms are useful, experience has shown that it is important to put greater emphasis on the interconnection of the multiple artefacts that make up the research process [@doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2020.102562]. 

The notion of **Research Objects** [@doi:10.1016/j.future.2011.08.004] (RO) was introduced to address this connectivity, providing semantically rich _aggregations_ of (potentially distributed) resources with a layer of structure over a research study; this is then to be delivered in a _machine-readable format_. 

A Research Object combines the ability to bundle multiple types of artefacts together, such as spreadsheets, code, examples, and figures. The RO is augmented with annotations and relationships that describe the artefacts' _context_ (e.g. a CSV being used by a script, a figure being a result of a workflow). 

This notion of ROs provides a compelling vision as an approach for implementing FAIR data. However, existing Research Object implementations require a large technology stack [@doi:10.1016/j.websem.2015.01.003], are typically tailored to a particular platform and are also not easily usable by end-users. 

To address this gap, a new community came together [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3250687] to develop **RO-Crate** — an _approach to package and aggregate research artefacts with their metadata and relationships_. The aim of this paper is to introduce RO-Crate and assess it as a strategy for making multiple types of research artefacts FAIR.  Specifically, the contributions of this paper are as follows:

1. An introduction to RO-Crate, its purpose and context;
2. A guide to the RO-Crate community and tooling;
3. Examples of RO-Crate usage, demonstrating its value as connective tissue for different artefacts from different communities.

The rest of this paper is organised as follows. We first describe RO-Crate through its development methodology that formed the RO-Crate concept, showing its foundations in Linked Data and emerging principles. We then define RO-Crate technically, before we introduce the community and tooling. We move to analyse RO-Crate with respect to usage in a diverse set of domains. Finally, we present related work and conclude with some remarks including RO-Crate highlights and future work. The appendix adds a formal definition of RO-Crate using First-Order logic.