## Development Methodology

It is a good question as to what base level we assume for ‘conceptually simple’. We take simplicity to apply at two levels: for the developers who produce the platforms and for the data practitioners and users who use those platforms. 

For our development methodology we followed the mantra of working closely with a small group to really get a deep understanding of requirements and rapid feedback loops. We created a pool of early adopter projects from a range of disciplines and groups, primarily addressing developers of   platforms. Thus the base level for simplicity was **developer friendliness**. 

We assumed a developer familiar with making Web applications with JSON data (which would then learn how to make RO-Crate JSON-LD), which has informed core design choices for our JSON-level documentation and specification in our approach of making the specification for RO-Crate serialization (section \ref{implementation}). This group drove the RO-Crate requirements and provided feedback through our multiple communication channels including bi-monthly meetings, which we describe in Section \ref{community}. 

Addressing the simplicity of understanding and engaging with RO-Crate by data practitioners is through the platforms, for example through  interactive tools like [Describo](https://uts-eresearch.github.io/describo/) [@describo] and Jupyter notebooks [@doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-649-1-87].  This requires a new type of awareness and learning material, focusing on the simplicity of extensibility to serve the user needs and the development of Profiles.

We are now ready to widen user adoption coupled with user evaluation to confirm our claims of developer friendliness and conceptual simplicity. The development of a comprehensive entry-level tutorial, maturing the reference implementation libraries and a series of EOSC Bring-your-own-Data (BYOD) training events for both communities are priorities, followed by a user survey as you suggest. 

We operate in an open community where future and potential users of RO-Crate are actively welcomed to participate and contribute feedback and requirements. Recent contacts include American Geophysical Union (AGU) on Data Citations,  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) on material science and InvenioRDM for the Zenodo data repository. 

The main addition in RO-Crate 1.2 will be the formalization of profiles for different categories of crates. Additional entity types have been requested by users, e.g. workflow runs, business workflows, containers and software packages, tabular data structures; these are not always matched well with existing schema.org types but may benefit from other vocabularies or even separate metadata files, e.g. from Frictionless Data  https://frictionlessdata.io/ 