## Conceptual Definition

A key premise of RO-Crate is the existence of a wide variety of resources on the Web that can help describe research. As such RO-Crate relies on concepts from the Web and in particular linked data. 


### Linked Data as a core principle

Linked Data [cite] is a core principle of RO-Crate, and IRIs[^1] are therefore used to identify the RO-Crate, its constituent parts and metadata descriptions, as well as to the properties and classes used in the metadata. 

[^1]:
     IRIs, are a generalization of URIs (which include well-known http/https URLs), permitting international Unicode characters without %-encoding [[RFC3987](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987)], commonly used on the browser address bar and in HTML5.

Using Linked Data, where consumers can follow the links for more (ideally both human- or machine-readable) information, the RO-Crate can then be sufficiently _self-described_ and related using global identifiers, without needing to recursively fully describe every referenced entity.

The base of Linked Data and shared vocabularies also means multiple RO-Crates and other Linked Data resources can be indexed, combined, queried, integrated or transformed using existing Semantic Web technologies like SPARQL and knowledge graph triple stores.


### RO-Crate is a self-described container

An RO-Crate is defined as a self-described **_Root Data Entity_,** which describes and contains _data entities_, which are further described using _contextual entities_.  A  **data entity** is primarily a _file_ (bytes on disk somewhere) or a _directory_ (dataset of named files); while a **contextual entity** exists outside the information system (e.g. a Person) and its bytes are primarily metadata.

The Root Data Entity_ _is a directory, the _RO-Crate Root_, identified by the presence of the _RO-Crate Metadata File `ro-crate-metadata.json`_. This is a JSON-LD file that describes the RO-Crate, its content and related metadata using Linked Data. 

The minimal [requirements for the root data entity metadata](https://www.researchobject.org/ro-crate/1.1-DRAFT/root-data-entity.html#direct-properties-of-the-root-data-entity) is _name_, _description_ and _datePublished_, as well as a contextual entity identifying its _license_; but additional metadata is frequently added depending on the purpose of the particular RO-Crate.

Because the RO-Crate is just a set of related resources and datasets, it can be stored, transferred or published in multiple ways, such as BagIt [[RFC8493](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8493.html)], Oxford Common File Layout [[OCFL](https://ocfl.io/1.0/spec/)], downloadable ZIP archives in Zenodo or dedicated online repositories, as well as published directly on the web, e.g. using GitHub Pages. Combined with Linked Data identifiers this caters for a diverse set of storage and access requirements across different scientific domains, e.g. metagenomics workflows producing ~100 GB of genome data, or cultural heritage records with access restrictions for personally identifiable data.


### Data Entities are described using Contextual Entities

RO-Crate distinguishes between [data and contextual entities](https://www.researchobject.org/ro-crate/1.1-DRAFT/contextual-entities.html#contextual-vs-data-entities) in a similar way to HTTP terminology _information_ (data) and _non-information_ (contextual) resource [[HttpRange-14](http://www.w3.org/2001/tag/doc/httpRange-14/HttpRange-14.html)]. While the data entities in the most common scenario are files and directories located by relative IRI references within the RO-Crate Root, they can also be web resources identified with absolute http/https IRIs.

As both types of entities are identified by IRIs, their distinction is allowed to be blurry; data entities can be located anywhere and be complex, and the contextual entities can have a Web presence beyond their description inside the RO-Crate. For instance  &lt;[https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1825-0097](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1825-0097)> is primarily an identifier for a person, but is secondarily also a web page that describes that person and their academic work. 

Any particular IRI might appear as a contextual entity in one RO-Crate, and a data entity in another; their distinction is that data entities can be considered to be _contained_ or captured by the RO-Crate, while the contextual entities are mainly _explaining_ the RO-Crate and its entities. It follows that an RO-Crate should have one or more data entities, although this is not a formal requirement.


### Best Practice Guide rather than strict specification

RO-Crate builds on Linked Data standards and community-evolved vocabularies like [JSON-LD](https://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-json-ld-20140116/) and [schema.org](https://schema.org/), but rather than enforce additional constraints and limits using perhaps intimidating technologies like _RDF shapes_ (SHACL, ShEx), RO-Crate aims instead to build a set of best practice guides on how to apply the existing standards in a common way to describe research outputs and their provenance.

As such the RO-Crate specification [[RO-Crate 1.1](https://w3id.org/ro/crate/1.1)] can be seen as an opinionated and example-driven guide to writing schema.org metadata as JSON-LD, and leaves it open for implementers to add additional metadata using other schema.org types and properties, or even using other Linked Data vocabularies/ontologies or their own ad-hoc terms.

This does not mean that RO-Crate has not got constraints, crucially the specification is quite strict on the style of the flattened JSON-LD to facilitate lightweight developer consumption and generation of the RO-Crate Metadata file without the need for RDF libraries. In addition, work has now begun to formalize different _profiles_ of RO-Crates, e.g. that submission to a workflow repository would expect an RO-Crate with at least one workflow with a declared license and workflow language. These optional profiles are planned to build on a combination of JSON Schemas and RDF shapes, but again these will primarily provide developers with guidance and suggestions rather than strict validation.


### Checking Simplicity

As previously discussed, one aim of RO-Crate is to be conceptually simple. This simplicity has been repeatable checked and confirmed through a community process. See for example discussion at ([GitHub issue #71 on ad-hoc vocabularies](https://github.com/ResearchObject/ro-crate/issues/71)). 

To further verify this idea, we have here formalized the RO-Crate definition (see Appendix X). An important result of this exercise is that the underlying data structure of RO-Crate is a depth limited tree of 1 level. The formalization also emphasizes the _boundness_ of the structure, namely, that elements are specifically identified as being either semantically _contained_ by the RO-Crate (_hasPart_), or are mainly referenced (_mentions_) and typed as _external _to the Research Object (Contextual Entities). 

<!-- formalism? -->


