# RO-Crate Tooling

The work of the community led to the development of a number of tools for creating and using RO-Crates. Table \ref{tab:tools} shows the current set of implementations. Reviewing this list, one can see that there are tools that support commonly used programming languages including Python, Javascript, and Ruby. Additionally, these tools can integrate with commonly used research environments; in particular, the command line (*ro-crate-html-js*). Furthermore, there are tools that cater to the end user (*Describo*, *Workflow Hub*). For example, Describo was developed to help researchers of the Australian [Criminal Characters project](https://criminalcharacters.com/), in annotating historical prisoner records, to gain greater insight into the history of Australia [@doi:10.1080/14490854.2020.1796500]. 

While the development of these tools is promising, our analysis of their maturity status show that the majority are in the Beta stage. This is partly due to the fact that the RO-Crate specification itself only recently reached 1.0 status, in November 2019 [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.3541888]. Now that there is a fixed point of reference, and RO-Crate 1.1 (October 2020) [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.4031327] has stabilised based on feedback from application development, we expect to see a further increase in the maturity of these tools. 

Given the stage of the specification, the targets of these tools have been primarily developers, essentially providing the core libraries for working with RO-Crates. Another target has been that of research data managers who need to manage and curate large amounts of data. 

We argue that the adoption of simple web technologies in the RO-Crate specification has led to the rapid development of this wide variety of tools. 
