## Digital Humanities: Cultural Heritage {#culturalheritage}

\label{sec:culturalheritage}

The Pacific And Regional Archive for Digital Sources in Endangered Cultures ([PARADISEC](https://www.paradisec.org.au/)) [@doi:10125/4567] maintains a repository of more than 500,000 files documenting endangered languages across more than 16,000 items, collected and digitized over many years by researchers interviewing and recording native speakers across the region. 

The [Modern PARADISEC demonstrator](https://mod.paradisec.org.au/) has been [proposed](https://arkisto-platform.github.io/case-studies/paradisec/) as an update to the 18 year old infrastructure, to also help long-term preservation of these artefacts in their digital form. The demonstrator uses RO-Crate to describe the overall structure and to capture the metadata of each item. The existing PARADISEC data collection has been ported and captured as RO-Crates. A Web portal then exposes the repository and its entries by indexing the RO-Crate metadata files, presenting a domain-specific view of the items — the RO-Crate is “hidden” and does not change the user interface.

The PARADISEC use case takes advantage of several RO-Crate features and principles. Firstly, the transcribed metadata are now independent of the PARADISEC platform and can be archived, preserved and processed in its own right, using Schema.org as base vocabulary and extended with PARADISEC-specific terms. 

In this approach, RO-Crate is the holder of itemised metadata, stored in regular files that are organised using [Oxford Common File Layout](https://ocfl.io/1.0/spec/) (OCFL) [@ocfl_2020], which  ensures file integrity and versioning on a regular shared file system. This lightweight infrastructure also gives flexibility for future developments and maintenance. For example a consumer can use Linked Data software such as a graph database and query the whole corpora using SPARQL triple patterns across multiple RO-Crates. For long term digital preservation, beyond the lifetime of PARADISEC portals, a “last resort” fallback is storing the generic RO-Crate HTML preview [@ro-crate-html-js]. Such human-readable rendering of RO-Crates can be hosted as static files by any Web server, in line with the approach taken by the Endings Project.[^3]

[^3]: The Endings Project \url{https://endings.uvic.ca/} is a five-year project funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) that is creating tools, principles, policies and recommendations for digital scholarship practitioners to create accessible, stable, long-lasting resources in the humanities.
