# Conclusion

\label{sec:conclusion}

RO-Crate has been established as an approach to packaging digital research artefacts with structured metadata. This approach assists developers and researchers to produce and consume FAIR archives of their research. 

RO-Crate is formed by a set of best practice recommendations, developed by an open and broad community. These guidelines show how to use "just enough" Linked Data standards in a consistent way. The use of structured metadata with a rich base vocabulary can cover general-purpose contextual relations, with a Linked Data foundation that ensures extensibility to domain- and application-specific uses.  We can therefore consider an RO-Crate not just as a structured data archive, but as a multimodal scholarly knowledge graph that can help "FAIRify" and combine metadata of existing resources. 

The adoption of simple Web technologies in the RO-Crate specification has helped a rapid development of a wide variety of supporting open source tools and libraries. RO-Crate fits into the larger landscape of open scholarly communication and FAIR Digital Object infrastructure, and can be integrated into data repository platforms. RO-Crate can be applied as a data/metadata exchange mechanism, assist in long-term archival preservation of metadata and data, or simply used at a small scale by individual researchers. Thanks to its strong community support, new and improved profiles and tools are being continuously added to the RO-Crate tooling landscape, making it easier for adopters to find examples and support for their own use case.


## Strictness vs flexibility

There is always a tradeoff between flexibility and strictness [@doi:10.1007/s11042-009-0397-2] when deciding on semantics of metadata models. Strict requirements make it easier for users and code to consume and populate a model, by reducing choices and having mandated “slots” to fill in. But such rigidity can also restrict richness and applicability of the model, as it in turn enforce the initial assumptions about what can be described.

RO-Crate attempts to strike a balance between these tensions, and provides a common metadata framework that encourages extensions. However, just like the RO-Crate specification can be thought of as a _core profile_ of schema.org in JSON-LD, we cannot stress the importance of also establishing domain-specific RO-Crate profiles and conventions, as explored in sections \ref{sec:profiles} and \ref{sec:inuse}. Specialization comes hand-in-hand with the principle of _graceful degradation_; RO-Crate applications and users are free to choose the semantic detail level they participate at, as long as they follow the common syntactic requirements. 